in chapter 5 titled the reality of
abstractions David explains how not
everything that exists can be reduced to
the motion of atoms and physical forces
acting upon those particles that is the
error known as reductionism and although
it is easily refuted it or at least
Echoes of it nevertheless hold sway in
mainstream Academia yes what happens is
determined by the laws of physics acting
upon particles moving in space-time but
that is just one kind of explanation one
level if you will there are emergent
levels of explanation where things come
into existence that are equally as real
as particles space-time and forces but
which can be fundamental importantly
among the things our best explanations
of reality are refer to are abstractions
not only things like the objects of pure
mathematics none numbers and sets and
Infinities of various kinds but also
knowledge itself and these things can
actually affect the physical world I
discussed this in my exploration of
chapter five today I'm doing chapter
five the reality of abstractions here we
learn about the fact that there's not
only physical material in the universe
but rather there's also some other kind
of part to reality namely there are
abstractions and these abstractions can
have real causal effects on physical
things like atoms
the reason why something like that ends
up taking the shape that it does has
nothing to do with self-organization and
physical forces it cannot be explained
purely in terms of the motion of atoms
and it can't be reduced to laws of
motion or any kind of law of physics
instead the explanation is that a great
architect called Gowdy
some 100 years ago decided to create
something like that the idea was
originally represented inside of his
mind the idea was originally some kind
of neural firings inside of his brain
but they can't be reduced to that either
it was an idea an abstract idea if you
had plans you put it down on paper and
then over many many years it's beginning
to take form or beginning to be
instantiated in
the rock and stone and mortar and other
materials that make up an absolutely
phenomenal
building like this one
it's only partially complete and
apparently it's going to be some decades
before it finally is
this is in Barcelona Spain
so with a great building something like
Gowdy's Cathedral
what we have is an idea that has somehow
taken physical form
so what we're saying there is ideas
which are abstractions knowledge which
is an abstraction can have real physical
effects in the world ideas can take
physical form abstractions can be
instantiated in the physical world but
are there different kinds of
abstractions does an abstraction have to
be instantiated so we say in a physical
substrate in Mata or something like
matter like light or sound waves it
doesn't have to be instantiated in order
to be an abstraction well I asked David
about different kinds of abstractions
now you mentioned in that answer there
the concept of abstractions and you
actually invoked abstractions in in
talking about it of course pure
mathematics is about abstractions and I
don't know what might be the most
controversial chapter in the book but I
think among intellectual types to at
least some extent it would be chapter 5
if it's not going to be the why flowers
are beautiful chapter it's going to be
the one that claims there is a reality
to abstractions because to some people
this seems weirdly enough you know not
to me I think not to most people
listening to this but it can sound like
an appeal to the supernatural or some
sort of woo because some people are
physicalists they think that everything
just has to come down to the behavior of
atoms but I wanted to ask you if you
distinguish between
kinds of abstractions rather than
defending the thesis that abstractions
are real I know this is not necessarily
a well-defined area but for example
something like numbers they're
abstractions are they different in kind
to let's say knowledge because after all
they're maybe infinitely well there are
infinitely many prime numbers and not
all of those prime numbers ever need to
be instantiated in a physical substrate
anywhere never the less they still exist
but knowledge to be knowledge has to be
extensive instantiated in a physical
substrate it's also abstract but well I
might pull the brakes there can you
explain if there are these different
species of abstractions and if so how do
we understand the differences in their
existence yes there are different
species of abstractions I mean maybe
it's better to say there there is a
classification of abstractions and some
classifications are quite useful
uh because uh abstractions within the
same category of classification have
similar properties and can be understood
with similar explanations or the same
explanation but then with the different
problem situations you might want to
classify things differently like you
know just like in biology we may wish to
sometimes we want to classify things as
mammals and birds and reptiles and so on
and on other occasions we may want to
classify them as aquatic creatures and
terrestrial creatures and aerial
creatures and so on so classifications
are useful relative to the problems that
they are that you want to talk about and
it's the same with abstractions it's
definitely true that some abstractions
as you say like knowledge and
information more generally don't exist
unless they're instantiated so they have
to have this extra element of being
instantiated but that that's also true
of there are there are more classic
applications than that even even among
pure abstractions there there are
abstractions that it it's it seems to be
important in mathematics to like I said
to distinguish between abstractions that
involve infinite sets and abstractions
that don't uh and then the whole idea of
a set is is not universally applicable
so the the set of all sets it famously
turned out even before girdle it turned
out that this from Russell that it it
turned out that the set of all sets
isn't a set
um so you then you have to invoke a
class it's just a class of things or the
set of all sets that don't contain
itself so there's that's right so
there's but it doesn't help because
there's it doesn't help with everything
because there's no such thing as the
class of all classes either right so yes
there there are different kinds of
things and another thing which which I
think is still slightly mysterious is
what kind of an abstraction the laws of
physics are so there'll be more to say
about that the laws of physics in
another episode but for now for more on
this see the rest of my two-part
exploration of the beginning of infinity
chapter 5 the reality of abstractions
that's available on YouTube and Via
podcast as I say it might be one of the
more controversial chapters of the book
I don't know why exactly but like I
hinted at there may be Echoes that
remain of a physicalist notion which was
I guess a reaction against people who
invoked the Supernatural and people who
reacted against religious or magical
type thinking they threw out the gods
the spirits the magic but with that
bathwater went I think the baby of a
whole class of things quite real and yet
not reducible to fundamental particles
accepting the reality of abstractions
enables the explanation of many
phenomena that are otherwise entirely
mysterious and inexplicable the denial
of them is just a kind of reductionist
or empiricist mistake it solves nothing
and ruins what we do know about the
nature of reality it reminds me a little
of the shut up and calculate people in
physics who are supposed to be the
hard-nosed Macho skeptical types who say
quantum theory allows predictions what
more do you want well what we want is to
understand what's going on it's not very
skeptical scientific or Macho to give up
on that in fact it's anti-rational it
impedes progress abstractions are real
as real as atoms are and dinosaurs were
get over it